# sexual_violence_college
Analysis of ICPSR data on sexual violence towards women in college

Project Topic and Relevance:

I was interested in looking at this topic because my honors thesis project is about female sexuality in the greek system. This data on sexual violence in college is not directly related to that, however, I will not be covering sexual assault in my thesis so I thought it would be interesting to review and analyze this data now. Within my dataset I was specifically looking at two characteristic traits, two types of assault, and the race of the respondent, for the first female cohort. The two characteristics were a likert scale of desire to please others (PLEASE) and wanting to stay in the background (NOASSERT). The two types of assault were sexual intercourse because of pressure (PRESSSI) and sexual intercourse because of authority (AUTHSI). I was interested in the associations between these specific variables because often times these are the characteristic traits we think of when we think of someone being taken advantage of, which is sociologically relevant when we think of victim blaming and the ideology behind that. This is an important area of investigation because part of the marginalization of women comes from this notion that the women who are assaulted are at fault for behaving or looking a certain way.  I wanted to test if this was true by seeing if there was a real association between certain characteristics and who was being targeted by sexual predators. Additionally, I was interested in controlling for race because women of color are often hypersexualized in the media and I wanted to know if this had an effect on who was being targeted by sexual predators.  

Finding Data:

When I first began this project I was just searching for any data that was related to female sexuality in college. I started my search using the University of Washington library resources and databases to see what kind of data I would find by using the keywords ‘female,’ ‘sexuality,’ and ‘college.’ Eventually I found the ICPSR data that I used for this project and I thought that this data collection about sexual assault in college would be interesting to dive deeper into and I began doing some of the initial class work using this data. However, at the beginning I was having a lot of difficulty using this data because it was coded as labelled data which can sometimes be hard to use during the data cleaning process because certain functions in R don’t read it correctly. Once realizing this and after facing a few preliminary roadblocks, I went back to the library databases and searched for a new dataset on a similar subject. I found one from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) website on sexual assault in college-aged women, but the data was not as full as the ICPSR data and had a lot more NAs in it, making any future analysis less meaningful. In the end I decided to stay with the ICPSR data and work through any data transformations I had to make. This was ultimately the best decision because I was able to have meaningful findings from my data analysis due to the large volume of variables and respondents in the dataset. After making my final decision to use the ICPSR dataset I decided on my research question: Do specific personality and identity traits affect which women are targeted by sexual predators? My hypothesis for this question was that specific personality and identity traits would affect which women are targeted, meaning that there would be a positive association between the identity traits PLEASE, NOASSERT, and RACE, and the types of sexual violence, AUTHSI and PRESSSI.

Data Structure and Data Munging:

My data was originally coded as labelled data because respondents were answering the questions using a likert scale or a multiple point system where the answers were coded with numbers. This was very difficult for me to work with at the beginning because certain functions in R don’t work correctly with labelled data, which was making it hard to perform the analyses that I wanted to with my data. I often had to coerce the data into different formats like numeric, factor, or character using the functions as.numeric(), factor(), or as.character(). Additionally, the full dataset from ICPSR has a lot of variables so for my analysis I had to subset the data into a smaller group, only including five variables: RACE, PLEASE, NOASSERT, AUTHSI,  and PRESSSI. I did this using the pipe operator in R from the “dplyr” package and using the select() function. Once I was using the data subset, cleaning and transforming my data became a lot more manageable. Although, I still ran into a lot of difficulties on different occasions where my data was not being read right in my code because it was coded as labelled originally. When I began playing with different data visualizations I knew I wanted to look at how the characteristics were interacting with the two types of assault, however, I wasn’t sure what was the best way to do this. I tried a scatter plot and a bar chart, but eventually I realized that the best way to achieve the analysis I wanted was to do a histogram of both NOASSERT and PLEASE at the same time while facetting for AUTHSI or PRESSSI.  I also did a histogram of AUTHSI and PRESSSI at the same time while facetting for RACE. This way I could compare the distributions across the different responses for each assault question. It was hard at first for me to get the facets to work correctly and present in a way that was meaningful to look at. I had an especially difficult time getting the facets to be labelled correctly instead of just having the number for the response as the label for each facet. Once I got that figured out the histograms were much easier to understand, but I did still have to include a legend for the likert scale of the personality traits because that would have been too many words to include on each facet for the responses to NOASSERT and PLEASE. In addition to being my visualizations for the data the histograms also helped me conduct a statistical analysis of the data by showing the distribution of the responses. The facets helped me compare the distributions by the responses to each type of assault. For my statistical analyses I also conducted a chi square test, an anova, and linear regressions to help me better understand the association between the variables. These were very helpful to me in understanding the association, however, I thought the histograms were the best option for my poster because they are the most straightforward visually.  My main challenge in the statistical analysis was making sure my data was in the right format for which function I was using because some of them did not work right with categorical data like mine so I had to make sure they were in numeric form. 

Reproducible Research:

Reproducible research is very important for the generalizability of a study. If another person besides the original researcher is not able to follow the steps of the research and come up with the same results it is difficult to be sure that the data analyses is correct and applicable to other sets of data. Additionally, reproducibility is ethically important because it makes the research process more transparent and allows for a more clear interpretation of the results by an outside party.  I employed principles of reproducibility in my own project by initiating git in my project in rstudio and constantly committing my work to my repository on github as I made changes to the data. Additionally, I made sure my data was available in my repository. I also made sure to actively make comments in my code to ensure my work would be easy to follow and it would be clear why I was using certain pieces of code. Both using git and commenting throughout the code were very useful techniques, not only for reproducibility, but also for general organization. The comments helped me make sure I could go back and understand why I was using certain codes at certain times and using git made sure that I always had my work saved somewhere other than my computer. This was useful when my files were erased, so that I could just go to github and download everything I had been working on. I will definitely use both of these in the future to help myself and to help ensure my work is reproducible. 


